
### C.I. 47 - High Court Civil Procedure rules

The objectives of C.I. 47 are stipulated in **Order 1 Rule 2** and the rules are to be applied and interpreted to achieve the following:

1. A speedy and effective trial; 

2. To avoid delays and unnecessary expense and ensure complete, effective and final determination of suits or disputes; 

3. To avoid multiplicity of proceedings. 

There should be an end to litigation. This was a principle enunciated in _Henderson v Henderson (1843) 3 Hare 100; 67 ER 313_ a decision of the English Court of Chancery which confirmed that a party may not raise any claim in subsequent litigation which they ought properly to have raised in a previous action.

Over the years, the Courts have sought to interpret the law in accordance with this principle, using all tools available to them to aid in the final determination of disputes.

>In _Sasu v Amua-Sekyi [1987-88] 1 GLR 506_ it was held that it was a recognised legal principle regulating the construction of statues that the true meaning and purport of words and expressions in an enactment were not to be taken in isolation but ascertained by considering their text. This case dealt with whether an Amendment to the Courts Act 1971 effectively introduced the rule that litigants must seek leave before appealing to the Supreme Court. There were glaring omissions in the enactment that led to certain words being unclear rendering the sections unintelligible. Thus it was up to the Court to fill the gaps by adding the missing words to the provisions…to make it sensible and in order to give effect to the intention of the legislature. It was stated that if the right to appeal to the Supreme Court was left unfettered it would mean that the legislature had undoubtedly engaged in a futile exercise. 

To further demonstrate the above objective of the rules **Order 37 rule 2** states that it is the duty of the courts, lawyers and the clients to avoid all unnecessary adjournment and delays and to ensure causes or matters are disposed of speedily as the justice of the case permit. 

Where the rule provides for a time period of 8 days, it is <span style="color:red;">**8 working days**</span> but any longer period is inclusive of weekends.

Again by **Order 37 rule 3**, where <span style="color:red;">**6 months** has elapsed since the last step was taken</span>, the party who intends to proceed must give the other side <span style="color:red;">**28 days** notice of intention to proceed</span>. The court would then have to decide whether to allow the notice. 

According to **Order 37 rule 4**, where no step has been taken for <span style="color:red;">**12 months**</span> from the date of the last proceeding and no notice under Rule 3 has been given, the Registrar or any party to the cause or matter may apply to the Court for an order that the cause or matter be struck out for want of prosecution. 

Notice of the application to strike out for want of prosecution shall be served on all the parties concerned at least <span style="color:red;">**14 days** before the day stated in the notice for hearing the application</span> (**Order 37 Rule 4**). 

If none of the parties shows cause to the satisfaction of the court why the cause or matter should not be struck out and upon proof of service of the notice on all parties concerned, the Court shall strike out the proceedings. However, if any party shows cause to the satisfaction of the Court why the cause or matter should not be struck out for want of prosecution, the Court shall order the proceedings to continue on such terms as it thinks fit.

One of the objectives of ensuring that C.I.47 is complied with is through **Order 81**, which deals with non-compliance with the rules. 

###The effect of non-compliance

**Order 81**
  
The mere fact that a party has defaulted in complying with the rules does not render the suit a nullity.

There are 3 Exceptions:

1. If the non-compliance <u>goes to the root of the matter</u> i.e. affects court’s jurisdiction, then it cannot be cured by **Order 81** eg: a writ not signed by a lawyer or a writ issued in Ghana served outside the jurisdiction.

2. Where the non-compliance is <u>a breach of the rules of natural justice</u>. E.g. a motion that must be with notice that is done ex parte and erroneously allowed by the court.

3. Where the non-compliance is <u>a breach of a statute/enactment</u>. E.g. issuing a writ in an election dispute or matrimonial proceedings instead of a petition.


####Effect of Order 81

_Republic v the High Court, Koforidua Ex parte Ansah Otu (Koans Building Solutions Lted Interested Party) [2009] SCGLR 141_: 

An injunction was granted on behalf of the interested party in accordance with Order 25 Rule 1 and 2. However Rule 9 of the same Order said that the Court ‘shall’ order the applicant for an injunction which is opposed by the other side to give an undertaking to pay damages to the other person if the injunction was given wrongfully. The Court failed to order such an undertaking to be given. The plaintiff appealed. Counsel for the interested party argued that the word ‘shall’ should be given a liberal and purposive meaning to mean ‘may’. The plaintiff’s action was dismissed on the basis of **Order 81 Rules 1** and **2** which states

1(1) Where, in beginning or purporting to begin any proceedings or at any stage in the course of or in connection with any proceedings, there has, by reason of any thing done or left undone, been a failure to comply with the requirements of these Rules, whether in respect of time, place, manner, form or content or in any other respect, the failure shall not be treated as an irregularity and shall not nullify the proceedings, any step taken in the proceedings, or any document, judgment or order in it. 

1(2) the Court may, on the ground that there has been such a failure as stated in subrule (1), and on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it considers just
 
a) set aside either wholly or in part the proceedings in which the failure occurred, any step taken in those proceedings or any document, judgment or order therein; or

b) exercise its powers under these Rules to allow such amendments to be made and to make such order dealing with the proceedings generally as it considers just.

Also see:

_Republic v High Court, Koforidua Ex parte Eastern Regional Devt Corporation [2003-04] SCGLR 21_

_Republic v High Court, Accra ex parte All Gate Co. Ltd (Amalgamated Bank Ltd- interested party) [2007-08] SCGLR_

The rules provide that court proceedings should be held in public or open court except in the interest of  public safety, public order and public morality (**Order 1 Rule 2**). Article 126(3) of the 1992 Constitution, and s.102 of the Courts Act 1993 also reiterate this. 

An exception to this rule can be found in in **Order 50 Rule 3** (Hearing an application for an order of committal can be held in chambers). 
